<DOC>
<DOCNO>860</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_travel/~3/giEW_dbvBPA/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>The new normal for winter: More flight cancellations ahead</TITLE>
<TIME>Wed, 12 Feb 2014 12:52:25 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
A Southern storm that the National Weather Service warned could be "catastrophic" has slowed down air travel across the United States.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
(CNN) -- A Southern storm that the National Weather Service warned could be "catastrophic" has slowed down air travel across the United States.
And it almost kept one groom from tying the knot.
Austrian businessman Roland Dimai's wedding to Vlada Golovina is scheduled for this weekend in his hometown. But he almost didn't make it after traveling to Atlanta for a conference last week.
8 tips to ease winter travel woes
On Wednesday, more than 3,300 flights out of 27,000 scheduled U.S. flights had been canceled by about 5 p.m. ET, according to flight tracking service FlightAware.com. Those cancellations follow more than 1,300 flight cancellations Tuesday.
A normal February day would see fewer than 100 cancellations, according to FlightAware's Daniel Baker.
Dimai had planned to take a United Airlines flight from Atlanta to Newark, New Jersey, on Wednesday evening, where he would connect to a Frankfurt, Germany, flight to get him home by Thursday morning. That would give him a day to get to his civil ceremony appointment at the government office in Dornbirn, Austria. A church wedding with family attending is scheduled for Monday.
"Without this appointment there will be no wedding," he told CNN earlier Wednesday via e-mail.
Seeing the weather reports, Dimai went to the airport two days ago to rebook his first flight for Wednesday morning. When he checked with the airline again, that flight had been canceled. United rebooked him on one of the few Delta Air Lines flights leaving Atlanta on Wednesday, which arrived in sunny and clear Detroit around 1:30 p.m. ET.
"I finally think I've found the right woman and I thought it's possible the wedding will not happen," said Dimai, laughing as he called CNN just after landing in Detroit. "I've been scared and sad and slightly hopeful to get it done."
Dimai reported snow on the ground in Detroit, but otherwise a nice and clear sunny day for flying as he waited for his flight to Frankfurt.
"Only due to the help and incredible support of the employees of United and Delta, I will make it home and I am looking forward to marry(ing) my wife," he added.
Dimai was one of the lucky ones.
Most of the cancellations Wednesday are at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, where more than 1,600, or nearly 70% of flights, have been canceled, according to FlightAware. Charlotte Douglas International Airport in North Carolina is the second most-affected airport, with more than 50% of its schedule canceled.
Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines canceled more than half of its Wednesday flights systemwide, and had already canceled about 1,200 Thursday flights by late Wednesday afternoon.
"We anticipate a moderate resumption of arrivals beginning mid-morning (Thursday) followed by a set of departures in the 2:00 hour ET," Delta spokesman Morgan Durrant said in a statement. "Our plan is to then gradually ramp up Atlanta operations to our usual levels through the day Thursday and into Friday."
Southwest, which also operates AirTran Airways, wasn't as severely affected by the storm. By Wednesday morning, about 350 of about 3,500 total Wednesday flights had been canceled for both airlines due to the weather, said Southwest spokesman Dan Landson. The airlines have suspended operations in Atlanta through 11 a.m. Thursday.
Airlines don't like ice.
Delta and Southwest Airlines didn't wait for Wednesday's ice storm to move many of their aircraft out of Atlanta. They flew airplanes to other airports to keep them out of the path of the storm.
Winter storms do most of their damage to air travel on the ground, requiring that aircraft be de-iced while runways and taxiways are cleared and treated, all while passengers, luggage and cargo get loaded into an airplane.
"Everything slows to a crawl as personnel and ground equipment get bogged down in the slush," wrote commercial pilot Patrick Smith, who blogs about flight at Askthepilot.com, in his latest book.
"Planes, meanwhile, cannot take off with ice or snow adhering to the wings, and need to sprayed down," wrote Smith. It's not the weight of the ice "but the way it disrupts airflow over and around a wing's carefully sculpted contours.
"This can take a half-hour or more per plane, and to preclude further buildup it needs to be done as close to departure as possible. And with fluid costing upwards of $5 per gallon, airlines dread snowstorms almost as much as strikes, wars and recessions. When you add in handling and storage costs, spraying a single jet can cost tens of thousands of dollars."
It's going to get worse before it gets better across the Eastern United States.
The Atlanta and Charlotte airports expect frozen precipitation to continue through Thursday morning, according to FlightAware.
At least most air travelers heading through Atlanta got the message about cancellations and delays before heading to the airport. About 175 passengers spent Tuesday night at the airport, said airport spokesman Reese McCranie. "Those numbers are far less than the storm we had two weeks ago."
The stranded passengers were outnumbered by the 280 airport employees who worked overnight.
The storm's impact will be felt most heavily in Atlanta and airports in North and South Carolina, but the weather system is on the move.
"As the storm moves East and Northeast, airport forecasts are calling for frozen precipitation at airports including D.C., Philadelphia, New York and Boston," FlightAware's Baker said in a statement.
Once the storm lets up, it could take days before the airlines can get all crew and aircraft back into position.
Airline customers should check their flight status with airlines before departing for the airport. Many airlines are offering flexible, no-fee changes to travel dates.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
