<DOC>
<DOCNO>1769</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_crime/~3/Jam3gOFj7fs/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>Fentanyl-laced heroin deaths take toll in Pennsylvania, frighten addicts</TITLE>
<TIME>Thu, 30 Jan 2014 19:18:29 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
Heroin laced with the painkiller Fentanyl is taking a huge toll in western Pennsylvania, authorities there say.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
For more on this story, watch "CNN Newsroom with Carol Costello" Friday at 10 a.m. ET.
Pittsburgh (CNN) -- Andrew grew up in a broken home in Pennsylvania, watching his mother abuse drugs and his father drink beer. His dad inexplicably started adding water to empty beer bottles and feeding Andrew the rinse when the boy was 4. Five years later, he was hooked on his mom's prescription pills. Today, at age 19, he has overdosed twice in the past week alone -- not on prescription pills, but heroin.
A friend's death from a heroin overdose scared Andrew back into rehab.
"It really made me feel not invincible anymore," said Andrew, who did not want his full name published, referring to a deadly new kind of heroin being peddled on the streets of Pittsburgh under harmless sounding names like "Theraflu" and "Bud Ice."
"I was doing probably about seven or eight bags; but those 'Theraflu' ones when I first overdosed, I only did about two or three," he said.
He is fortunate to be alive. In the last week, 22 people have died in six counties in western Pennsylvania from what authorities believe are Theraflu- and Bud Ice-brand heroin overdoses.
An analysis of evidence from the scenes in Allegheny County, where Pittsburgh is located, shows that the white powder in the individually wrapped bags contained about 50% Fentanyl, a powerful narcotic prescribed to cancer patients as a medication of last resort. Medical experts say Fentanyl is 10 to 100 times stronger than morphine.
A Pennsylvania man identified as Tywon Laniel Newby, 39, was arrested Thursday on drug charges this week as part of an investigation into the spate of heroin overdose deaths in western Pennsylvania, state Attorney General Kathleen G. Kane announced.
Authorities seized more than 2,000 bags of suspected heroin from Newby's home, including a shoebox with 48 bricks of suspected heroin with bags stamped with the name "Sky High," Kane said in a statement. Investigators believe drug dealers are "rebranding" drug packages now that the Theraflu and Bud Ice brands have been widely reported to be dangerous.
"It is my highest priority to find and hold accountable those involved in the distribution of this deadly drug mixture," Kane said.
In Allegheny County alone, 15 people have died from overdoses in the last week. The medical examiner, Dr. Karl Williams, said the victims were of all races, male and female, ranging from 22 to 53 years of age.
Williams, who has been the medical examiner for seven years, said it was the first time he's seen three or four heroin overdoses back to back on consecutive days.
"It is a marked increase ... at least three or four times what we would expect," he said.
On the street, word of a new, potent drug traveled quickly. Andrew said he and other addicts sought it out, eager for an ever-elusive "better" high.
"That's the sick thing about addiction," he said. "When someone knows there are heroin bags that are killing people or making them overdose, then we know that those are the good bags."
Andrew's habit didn't start with shooting up heroin. He started with his mom's prescription pills when he was 9, heeding the advice of videos he said his mom watched about how good drugs made users feel.
"Then one day I was with my dad and his friends and I didn't have pills that day," he said. "I was obviously withdrawing, and a guy noticed that and said, 'I'll show you something that makes you feel better.' He shot me up with heroin."
He was 13, and his life changed forever. Andrew hit the streets in search of heroin. At one point he shot up 30 bags a day.
"I would lie to my family, steal from people, manipulate," said Andrew, adding that in the past year alone he has stolen and borrowed about $30,000 from his grandparents to feed his addiction.
Two overdoses and the recent Theraflu-brand heroin overdose death of a friend landed him in rehab. Andrew is at the Greenbriar Treatment Center near Pittsburgh.
Holly Martin, the center's chief operating officer, said that since Theraflu appeared on the street market, worried parents have been calling about their addicted children. Some addicts, like Andrew, called asking for help, she said. Some older addicts were flat out scared that the potent new drug would kill them.
"We're treating professionals," said Martin. "We treat a lot of nurses. We treat a lot of pharmacists. But we also treat teachers, mill workers, steel workers. We treat people from every walk of life."
Martin said new detox beds and a round-the-clock nurse have been added to deal with the surge in cases.
One nurse, Beth Vernau, a soft-spoken woman who works with many young boys seeking treatment, said her son -- also named Andrew -- died from a heroin overdose in October.
"Emotionally, you can never be ready ... for that to happen," she said, adding that his death could have been prevented. "The word came back that the people he was with drove him around for an hour and a half, trying to wake him up and then finally decided to take him to the emergency room."
He was hospitalized two days before dying from an addiction that started when he was 13, Vernau said. He started abusing alcohol and pot, then prescription drugs and, finally, heroin.
"Most people who do become addicted to the opiates, a lot of them do start out with the legitimate reason -- a back injury, a sports injury," she said. "Andrew's was actually a motor-cross incident in which he broke his arm and had to have pins and plates put in it. That was his first introduction to the opiates."
When the doctor cut his prescription, Vernau said, her son started buying $80 pills on the street. He quickly learned he could score heroin for just $10 a stamp bag, which is also the estimated price of the deadly Theraflu and Bud Ice heroin laced with Fentanyl.
"It makes me very angry that there is somebody out there that is manufacturing this stuff that is just killing people daily, multiple people every day," Vernau said.
In Homestead, a borough on outskirts of Pittsburgh, police detectives earlier this week executed a search warrant at one location and recovered 1,500 bags of Bud Ice with a street value of about $15,000, police said.
Under other street brand names, Fentanyl has killed in the past. There were 269 deaths reported in Pennsylvania in 2006 and 50 deaths in mid-2013. Other states, including New York and Rhode Island, have also seen deaths in recent years.
Andrew, meanwhile, calls his insatiable appetite for heroin his greatest enemy.
"I'm just scared of myself," he said. "I don't know what to do."
CNN's Vivienne Foley contributed to this report.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
