<DOC>
<DOCNO>6368</DOCNO>
<URL>http://feeds.foxnews.com/~r/foxnews/sports/~3/COnbyKU7w-g/</URL>
<TITLE>S. Carolina rides pitching to 1st 10-0 start since 2005, but Holbrook warns of tougher tests</TITLE>
<TIME>Mon, 03 Mar 2014 22:23:55 GMT</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
South Carolina coach Chad Holbrook is taking his team's first 10-0 start since 2005 in stride.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
South Carolina's Grayson Greiner, center, celebrates with teammate Kyle Martin after diving around Clemson catcher Chris Okey, right, to score the tying run in an NCAA college baseball game on Sunday, March 2, 2014, in Clemson, S.C. (AP Photo/Anderson Independent-Mail, Mark Crammer) GREENVILLE NEWS OUT; SENECA NEWS OUTThe Associated Press
South Carolina's Marcus Mooney, right, celebrates with Zack Madden after they scored the winning runs in the ninth inning to defeat Clemson 5-3 in an NCAA college baseball game on Sunday, March 2, 2014, in Clemson, S.C. (AP Photo/Anderson Independent-Mail, Mark Crammer) GREENVILLE NEWS OUT; SENECA JOURNAL OUTThe Associated Press
South Carolina coach Chad Holbrook is taking his team's first 10-0 start since 2005 in stride.
"It's good to be sitting where we are," Holbrook said Monday, noting that it's still early. "With conference play and a lot of difficult opponents our schedule, we have a cauldron coming up."
The Gamecocks were impressive in their first major test, winning three straight over in-state rival Clemson this past weekend. The sweep came after a program-record five straight shutouts and carried them to the No. 1 ranking in this week's Collegiate Baseball newspaper poll.
Starters Jordan Montgomery, Jack Wynkoop and Wil Crowe have combined to allow 12 earned runs in 55 innings, and the staff has a 1.60 ERA and 95 strikeouts in 90 innings.
Cody Mincey and Joel Seddon have been dominant. Mincey (2-0), a junior-college transfer, has struck out 16 in nine innings. Seddon, the closer, hasn't allowed a hit or run in six relief appearances spanning 7 2-3 innings.
"I knew they had a chance to be good, but they hadn't done it at this level," Holbrook said. "You always wonder how they'll react. Through 10 games they've pitched exceptionally well, a little bit better than I would have thought."
First baseman Kyle Martin is batting .472 with six multi-hit games, and right fielder Connor Bright (.462) has hit safely in 11 straight games since last season. Catcher Grayson Greiner has hit three home runs, including a grand slam Friday, and the Gamecocks average better than 8 runs a game.
South Carolina lost a three-game super regional to North Carolina, denying the Gamecocks a return to the College World Series to play for a third straight national championship. Holbrook, in his second season after replacing Ray Tanner, has an experienced team that's picked to win the Southeastern Conference.
"We've got a number of guys who have played in the College World Series and in some awfully big games," he said. "There are times I can put a team on the field with no freshmen and not even a sophomore. That historically bodes well. On top of that, they're pretty good, so you have a chance to have a special year."
Here's a look around college baseball:
WETZLER RETURNS: Oregon State left-hander Ben Wetzler was sharp in his season debut Sunday, allowing four hits and one run over 7 2-3 innings in a win over Wright State. Wetzler was suspended the first 11 games by the NCAA for having a representative allegedly violate a rule governing contact between advisers and pro sports teams. Wetzler was drafted in the fifth round by the Phillies last year.
JAKE'S NO-NO: Jake Stinnett pitched Maryland's first no-hitter since 2008 in a 4-0 win over Massachusetts on Saturday. The senior right-hander walked two and struck out nine, retiring the last 11. In his previous start, Stinnett was perfect through five innings and allowed one hit and struck out a career-high 11 in eight innings against Bryant.
RISING LONGHORNS: Texas won the Houston College Classic and has won eight of nine games. Dillon Peters pitched eight innings in a 2-0 win over Rice on Friday, and the Longhorns followed with 3-2 wins over Houston and Sam Houston State. At 9-3, the Longhorns are No. 10 in Baseball America, their highest ranking since 2011.
DEVILISH PITCHERS: Arizona State sophomore left-handers Ryan Kellogg and Brett Lilek combined to strike out 15 and limit Oklahoma State to three hits in a 6-1 win Sunday. Kellogg struck out the side to start the game and finished with a career-high 10 Ks in five innings. Lilek retired 11 in a row at one point.
SETON HALL SWEEP: The Big East got a boost when Seton Hall won three straight against the Pac-12's Arizona. It was the first three-game, non-conference sweep in Tucson since 2009. The Pirates outscored Arizona 24-5 and have won six straight to improve to 11-2.
HOT HAWKS AND JAYHAWKS: Long-struggling Iowa already has shown improvement under first-year coach Rick Heller. The Hawkeyes are 9-1, albeit against undistinguished competition, and are off to the program's best start since beginning 10-0-1 in 1940. Kansas, meanwhile, is 11-1 for its best start in its 134-year baseball history.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
