<DOC>
<DOCNO>5877</DOCNO>
<URL>http://feeds.foxnews.com/~r/foxnews/sports/~3/4n1Nvv-u4eI/</URL>
<TITLE>Mediocrity a major struggle for the bottom tier teams in the NBA's Eastern Conference</TITLE>
<TIME>Thu, 06 Feb 2014 23:08:13 GMT</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
The NBA's Eastern Conference is awful — and it only appears to be getting worse, particularly at the bottom of the standings.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
Cleveland Cavaliers head coach Mike Brown, right, talks to Kyrie Irving in the first quarter of an NBA basketball game against the Los Angeles Lakers, Wednesday, Feb. 5, 2014, in Cleveland. (AP Photo/Mark Duncan)The Associated Press
Milwaukee Bucks forward Giannis Antetokounmpo, of Greece, reacts after hurting his leg against the Denver Nuggets late in the fourth quarter of the Nuggets' 110-100 victory in an NBA basketball game in Denver on Wednesday, Feb. 5, 2014. (AP Photo/David Zalubowski)The Associated Press
Milwaukee Bucks guard Luke Ridnour, front, picks up loose ball as Denver Nuggets guard Ty Lawson covers in the first quarter of an NBA basketball game in Denver, Wednesday, Feb. 5, 2014. (AP Photo/David Zalubowski)The Associated Press
Orlando Magic guard Arron Afflalo continues to question referee Mark Lindsay after he was charged with a technical foul in the second half of an NBA basketball game against the Indiana Pacers in Indianapolis, Monday, Feb. 3, 2014. The Pacers defeated the Magic 98-79. (AP Photo/Michael Conroy)The Associated Press
Detroit Pistons' Josh Smith, right, drives to the basket past Orlando Magic's Tobias Harris during the first half of an NBA basketball game in Orlando, Fla., Wednesday, Feb. 5, 2014. (AP Photo/John Raoux)The Associated Press
The NBA's Eastern Conference is awful — and it only appears to be getting worse, particularly at the bottom of the standings.
The shortage of quality teams in the East has left the door open for mediocre squads to earn playoff berths. Only four teams in the conference have winning records.
NBA analyst and former head coach Jeff Van Gundy said Thursday, "Some teams have made a conscious choice to be bad."
Van Gundy is talking about tanking games — and he believes it's prevalent in the Eastern Conference this season. Overall, the East is 94-177 vs. the West entering Thursday night's games.
He wouldn't say which teams he believes aren't giving it their all in an effort to better position themselves for a good pick in what looks to be a loaded 2014 NBA draft, but he said the problem is real.
"It doesn't necessarily mean the guys on the floor aren't trying hard, but it means teams have put some really bad rosters on the floor," Van Gundy said. "A lot of teams right now are happy with losing and that's really too bad for the league. That's too bad for the fans."
Especially for fans of teams that can't make the playoffs in the East.
If mediocre, or even sub-par, gets a team in the East into the postseason — that doesn't say much about Detroit, New York, Boston, Cleveland, Philadelphia, Orlando and Milwaukee.
They are currently bringing up the rear in the East. None of the teams have won 20 games and the All-Star break is next weekend.
Cleveland couldn't even beat the Lakers on Wednesday night, even though Los Angeles was down to just four eligible players with 3:36 left in the game. On Thursday, the Cavaliers fired general manager Chris Grant.
"I've never seen the discrepancy (in talent) like it is in the East," Van Gundy said. "It's as bad as it gets."
Van Gundy said the lottery system is part of the problem and needs to be changed.
"What was set up to be a good thing is now being abused," Van Gundy said. "You never want to give an incentive to losing in any sport."
___
Here are five factors that have contributed to the futility that engulfs the bottom of the Eastern Conference:
LOST IN TRANSITION: Boston, Orlando and Philadelphia are among the teams in the midst of major rebuilding projects. Some, like the Celtics, have purposely taken on huge contracts this season in hopes of clearing salary cap space for the future and adding draft picks in the process. The Magic, for instance, made no bones about the idea they were going to play young guys like rookie Victor Oladipo and allow them to develop. The same goes for the 76ers, who handed to reigns of the offense to Michael Carter-Williams.
TALENT DEFICIENCIES: It's hard to reach the playoffs or be a major factor when facing the Miami Heat with unproven starting lineups. In Philadelphia, the 76ers start Evan Turner, Thaddeus Young, Spencer Hawes, James Anderson and Carter-Williams. Philadelphia's best player off the bench is either Tony Wroten or Lavoy Allen. But Philadelphia's lineup is not dissimilar to the challenge other teams in the conference cellar face. "Right now the East has some bad basketball teams," Van Gundy said.
INJURIES: Several teams have struggled to keep their difference-makers on their floor — perhaps none as much as Milwaukee. At different times, the Bucks have had to play without Larry Sanders, O.J. Mayo and Caron Butler. Other teams feel their pain. Rajon Rondo missed Boston's first 42 games with a knee injury and the Knicks have played 24 games without Tyson Chandler.
CHEMISTRY ISSUES: There are some fairly dysfunctional teams in the East, few more so than the Knicks and Cavaliers. Both teams have talent on the roster, but can't seem to find the right players to mesh. The Cavaliers have had a handful of top draft picks — Kyrie Irving, Tristan Thompson, Dion Waiters and this season's No. 1 pick in Anthony Bennett — but can't seem to win games. J.R. Smith has been a lightning rod of controversy for New York.
MISSING THE POINT: To win in the NBA, a top-notch point guard is a must-have. The Cavaliers have Irving and the 76ers may have found something in rookie of the year candidate Carter-Williams, but the other teams currently trailing in the playoff race lack dominant point guards that can effectively create off the dribble and consistently run the offense.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
