<DOC>
<DOCNO>886</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_living/~3/nW-rGtXL6MI/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>The best beauty products of all time</TITLE>
<TIME>Mon, 31 Mar 2014 15:40:02 EDT</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
Behold the lotions, potions, and fragrances that, according to 300 experts, have transcended time and claimed their spots in the pantheon of beauty greats. Why? Because they are wonderful -- and they work.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
(Real Simple) -- Behold the lotions, potions, and fragrances that, according to 300 experts, have transcended time and claimed their spots in the pantheon of beauty greats. Why? Because they are wonderful—and they work.
Real Simple: Don't sweat the small stuff
Whether their formulas have changed with the times or stayed delightfully the same, these 12 miracle workers deserve a permanent place in the medicine cabinet.
Skin
Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair: Introduced in 1982, this one-of-a-kind serum gave new meaning to the term "beauty sleep." The formula, which is hyaluronic acid--based, is said to help enhance skin's natural renewal process, which peaks at nighttime.
Calgon Bubble Bath: With an unforgettable 1960s ad campaign ("Take me away!"), Calgon's fragrant soaks introduced the concept of bathroom as sanctuary.
FYI: The company started out as a water-softener brand in 1933. The name Calgon is derived from "CALcium GONe."
Real Simple: Relax more, stress less
Q-tips: In 1923 Leo Gerstenzang conceived the idea of a "ready to use" cotton swab after watching his wife wrap cotton around a toothpick to clean their baby's ears. The swabs' uses continue to evolve, as in the introduction of Q-tips Precision Tips in 2011. "Q-tips were my first beauty tool. I've used them on everyone from my babies to Beyoncé," says Mally Roncal, the creator of Mally Beauty.
Dove Beauty Bar: Soap dates back to at least 600 B.C., but until 1957, when the Dove Beauty Bar was introduced, it was always considered drying. Touted as the first soap-free cleanser on the market, the Dove bar was innovative in that it cleansed without stripping skin.
FYI: It is Dove's best-selling product globally, with more than 1.2 billion sold annually.
Vaseline: In 1870, after watching oil riggers use a paraffin-like wax to help heal their burns, Robert Chesebrough introduced "Vaseline Petroleum Jelly" to the public.
FYI: In the 1920s, movie stars used Vaseline on their teeth to help them shine on-screen.
ChapStick: In the 1800s, Charles Browne Fleet created the first ChapStick by wrapping lip balm in foil. Now it comes in four classic flavors (plus limited editions, like Citrus Jelly Bean).
Real Simple: How to do relaxation breathing
FYI: During the Watergate break-in, empty tubes of ChapStick were used to conceal microphones.
Oil of Olay Beauty Fluid: In the early 1950s, a chemist named Graham Wulff and his wife, Dinah, developed a new kind of facial moisturizer that was meant to mimic sebum. Ironically, in 2000 the "Oil of" was dropped to represent the light texture of the lotion more accurately.
Pond's Cold Cream: With 50 percent moisturizer, this cream cleanser removes makeup while providing hydrating comfort. Since 1905 the all-in-one product has amassed a cult following that spans generations of women.
FYI: In 2010 sales in the United Kingdom quadrupled after pop star Kylie Minogue gave it her seal of approval.
Aquaphor: Introduced in 1945, the balm was first used as a base for preparing other emulsions. It was revamped as a multipurpose salve and, in 1998, became known as the "Healing Ointment" that we use today.
FYI: It has just seven (fragrance-free) ingredients.
Real Simple: How to feel better every day
Cetaphil Gentle Skin Cleanser: Since 1947 this mild wash has remained a dermatologist favorite. Soap- and fragrance-free, the gentle formula (developed by a pharmacist) is safe for all skin types and is now available in travel-friendly cloths.
Clinique Facial Soap Bar: Born in 1968, this now ubiquitous cleansing bar was (and still is) part of the three-step skin-care system Clinique is famous for. Formulated by dermatologists, the bar creates a soft, nondrying lather.
FYI: A liquid version was introduced in 2006.
Bioré Strips: Launched in 1997, the strips were a first of their kind to remove blackheads without squeezing. The secret? Special ingredients that bond to dirt and oil trapped in pores. "Using Bioré Strips was such a horrific yet liberating experience," says Jerrod Blandino, the cofounder of Too Faced cosmetics.
Hair
Nora Ephron once said that the secret upside of death was not having to worry about your hair anymore. These seven stalwarts have helped grace legions of fans with hair they can live with (and even love).
Real Simple: The psychology of social media
AquaNet: Dubbed the "all-weather hair spray," this product is famous for providing a firm, lasting hold in any climate.
FYI: AquaNet is prominently featured in a memorable scene in 1989's When Harry Met Sally..., where Meg Ryan's Sally sets her hair on a car trip to New York City.
Dippity-do: Invented in 1965 for setting curls, the gel, with its unique, jellylike texture, later gained popularity among young men. Subsequently the packaging went from a jar to a blue squeeze bottle, which can still be found on shelves today.
FYI: When he was a teen, the late rocker Eric Carr, of Kiss, reportedly drenched his hair in Dippity-do and pulled a stocking over his head before bed in an attempt to get his curly hair to lie flat, like the Beatles'.
Johnson's Baby Shampoo: In 1953, more than 60 years after Johnson & Johnson first sold baby powder, the family-friendly company introduced a mild shampoo for kids. The unique formula, later trademarked as "No more tears," gently cleans hair without soap and doesn't sting the eyes.
FYI: An updated formula, free of formaldehyde-releasing preservatives, hit shelves in early 2014.
John Frieda Frizz-Ease: This serum was the first to target frizz on hair of any texture. "When Frizz-Ease came out," says hairstylist Harry Josh, "it instantly became a staple in every stylist's kit. Decades later it's still an essential part of my arsenal."
Clairol Professional Shimmer Lights Shampoo: Predating the explosion of color-enhancing and preserving shampoos and conditioners, this instant classic has been around for more than 30 years, keeping hair of all shades (blond, brunet, red, and gray) vibrant.
Aveda Shampure: Featuring 25 pure flower and plant essences, this aromatic hair cleanser has a soothing scent that has since become a signature for the brand and its many spa locations.
FYI: Each year 100 million gallons of Shampure are purchased worldwide.
Herbal Essences Shampoo: You may, ahem, recall the commercials. In fact, the "organic experience" shampoo did have green beginnings, at least in a literal sense: The original formula was green in color and had a woodsy scent unlike that of any other product.
Makeup and fragrance
Apply the right color, spritz on a sublime scent, and you'll not only look and smell ready to take on your day—you'll also feel it. These items continue to provide us with transformative experiences.
Coty Airspun Face Powder: In 1935 beauty pioneer François Coty helped design a pretty tin for his scented loose powder. Oil- and fragrance-free formulas have been introduced since then, but the charming powder puff--adorned package remains virtually the same.
White Diamonds Elizabeth Taylor: As an homage to the rocks she loved, the actress sought to provide women with a sense of "sparkle and uplift" each time they sprayed on her perfume.
FYI: Since its launch in 1991, it remains one of the most successful celebrity fragrances of all time.
Chanel No. 5: Setting out to create a scent for the modern women for whom she designed clothing, Coco Chanel enlisted the help of Ernest Beaux, a perfumer who worked for the Russian royal family. After several months, Beaux presented Chanel with an array of samples, and she picked one corresponding to her lucky number, five.
MAC Cosmetics Lip Pencil in Spice: Praised as the "perfect nude" by countless makeup artists, this toffee lip pencil first gained popularity in the 1990s, when supermodel Linda Evangelista publicly professed her devotion. Because of its ongoing popularity, the pencil is a part of MAC's permanent collection. It can be worn alone or as a base to warm up cool-toned lip colors.
Maybelline New York Great Lash Mascara: Introduced in 1971, it is sold once every 1.3 seconds in the United States.
FYI: Maybelline is a mix of Mabel (sister of the company's founder) and Vaseline (an ingredient in the first modern mascara).
Laura Mercier Secret Camouflage: This concealing duo (one shade matches your skin; the other matches your undertones) provides natural-looking coverage.
FYI: It was inspired by a treatment Mercier discovered through a plastic surgeon to minimize redness from burns.
Dr. Pepper Lip Smacker: In 1973 Jess Bell created the first flavored lip gloss. Forty years and 800-plus flavors later, the balms are still a fan favorite. "Whenever I went to the store with my mom, I would sneak one into the basket and coyly ask, 'How did that get in there?' " says Kerry Cole, the style director of Becca Cosmetics.
Which of these products have you used? Share your experiences in the comments, on Twitter @CNNLiving or on CNN Living's Facebook page.
Get a FREE TRIAL issue of Real Simple - CLICK HERE!
Copyright © 2011 Time Inc. All rights reserved.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
