<DOC>
<DOCNO>1576</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_allpolitics/~3/HLthxgWiUrQ/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>Documents show concerns about impact on EMS</TITLE>
<TIME>Fri, 10 Jan 2014 17:45:33 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
New Jersey lawmakers will release 907 pages of documents Friday that could shed new light on a scandal that's forced an "embarrassed and humiliated" Gov. Chris Christie to apologize over a bit of apparent political retribution he says went no higher than his deputies.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
(CNN) -- New Jersey officials realized early on that lane closures on access lanes to the George Washington Bridge morphed from a traffic nightmare into a major safety concern in Fort Lee, New Jersey.
"Specifically traffic conditions required Ft Lee officers to remain out on corners, managing traffic instead of attending to public safety issues," Robert Durando, the general manager of the George Washington Bridge wrote in an e-mail on September 9, as traffic continued to back up.
Durando also expressed concerns about the "inability of emergency response vehicles ... to traverse the borough while responding to emergencies."
"Fort Lee is not happy," Durando said in another e-mail.
The revelations are part of more than 2,000 pages of documents released Friday by a New Jersey State Assembly committee as part of its investigation of Gov. Chris Christie's top advisers, who are accused of closing access lanes to the country's busiest bridge as an act of political retribution against Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich.
The documents also suggest that at least one official, David Wildstein, at the time New Jersey's top appointee to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, was aware that there might be political fallout from having helped orchestrate the traffic logjam. Wildstein, who left his job last month, forwarded e-mails about the bridge lane closures in September from his official account to his personal Gmail.
On one occasion, Wildstein forwarded the e-mails after a member of his staff told him a Wall Street Journal reporter was asking questions about the lane closures.
He did the same when Democratic Rep. Bill Pascrell sent a letter inquiring about traffic getting onto the bridge.
Officials in New Jersey and New York were also angry and shocked that traffic lanes from Fort Lee into New York were shut in September during a Jewish holiday, according to the documents.
Scott Rechler, vice chairman of the board of commissioners of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, e-mailed other representatives on the transportation authority that he was disturbed that traffic was snarled "without regard to this being the Jewish high holiday weekend." Rechler was appointed by New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo.
"This is terribly disturbing and incomprehensive to me," he wrote. "How can a decision like this be made without it being discussed and considered at the highest levels?"
The latest documents shed new light on a scandal that forced an "embarrassed and humiliated" Christie to apologize over the alleged political retribution. He says knowledge of the events went no higher than his deputies.
The scandal has rocked Christie's administration and raised questions about how it might affect the popular Republican's potential presidential candidacy.
The extensive file of information was released by a New Jersey legislative committee investigating alleged abuse of authority by a top-level Christie staffer and other associates apparently behind a political retribution scheme to orchestrate traffic jams in Fort Lee to punish the mayor for not endorsing the governor for re-election.
Friday's documents follow explosive e-mails released on Wednesday that identified key players and the basic outlines of the alleged scheme.
Christie denounced the effort as outrageous and not connected to him. He fired one of his top aides. Others identified as being involved have also left their jobs.
In addition to the legislative investigation, the scandal has prompted a review by federal prosecutors and triggered at least one lawsuit against Christie and those at the center of the storm.
Sokolich, the Democratic politician allegedly targeted because he didn't endorse Christie's re-election bid, said the tie-ups in September caused residents "misery and agony" in his town.
He met with Christie on Thursday and told CNN that the governor was gracious and that he accepted his apology. But Sokolich believes the matter is far from finished.
An uncharacteristically low-key Christie appeared chastened at a news conference before his meeting with Sokolich, and said he was stunned by the revelations.
Christie and his staff originally blamed traffic snafus on a transportation study they said had been mishandled.
Christie said he found out about the more troubling reason for the disruption on Wednesday when the e-mails surfaced publicly.
Christie's political star hangs in the balance, with multiple investigations immediately clouding any future aspirations of a presidential run in 2016.
Read the e-mails
The e-mail exchanges began three weeks before access lanes to the bridge were closed, two months before Election Day.
"Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee," Bridget Anne Kelly, Christie's deputy chief of staff for legislative and intergovernmental affairs, said in an e-mail to Wildstein, then the highest-level appointee representing the state at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The transportation agency operates the George Washington Bridge, which connects New York and New Jersey.
"Got it," Wildstein replied.
Wildstein left his job in December and Kelly was fired this week.
The scheme unfolded from there, leading to traffic tie-ups from September 9-13.
On Thursday, Wildstein obeyed a judge's order to appear before a state legislative committee. But he invoked his constitutional right to not testify.
Assemblyman John Wisniewski, the state legislator leading the investigation, has accused Christie of still holding back.
"We intend to continue our investigation, but this would all be made easier if Gov. Christie did the right thing and voluntarily released all communications so everyone could find out with certainty what happened," Wisniewski said in a statement. "If he's truly dedicated to transparency and the truth from here on out, he will take this step and cooperate fully with the committee's work."
Legal woes lurk for Gov. Chris Christie over bridge scandal
The scandal threatens to imperil Christie's presidential ambitions but has not necessarily derailed them, Oxford University historian Timothy Stanley wrote in an opinion piece for CNN.com.
"He's a resourceful politician and it's still many months before campaigning starts in earnest," Stanley wrote. "But now, his opponents have a stick to beat him with."
Bridge firestorm could have bigger impact on Christie
CNN's Leigh Ann Caldwell, Ben Brumfield, Adam Aigner-Treworgy, John King, Shimon Prokupecz, Chelsea J. Carter, Paul Steinhauser, Peter Hamby, Ray Sanchez, Catherine E. Shoichet and Michael Pearson contributed to this report.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
