<DOC>
<DOCNO>1683</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_allpolitics/~3/XfD05aQkJ_8/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>More Chris Christie: What you need to know</TITLE>
<TIME>Mon, 03 Feb 2014 14:19:46 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has kept a relatively low profile in recent weeks with investigations of the George Washington Bridge traffic fiasco heating up. But he boiled over this weekend following the disclosure of potentially damaging new information and he will speak about it again on Monday night.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
Washington (CNN) -- New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has kept a relatively low profile in recent weeks with investigations of the George Washington Bridge traffic fiasco heating up. But he boiled over this weekend following the disclosure of potentially damaging new information and was striking out again on Monday.
David Wildstein, a one-time top Christie transportation appointee and a central figure in the political scandal roiling the Republican's administration, alleged in a letter released by his lawyer that "evidence exists" to contradict statements Christie made previously about the controversy.
Specifically, the letter released on Friday covers Christie's statement in January on when he found out about unannounced bridge access lane closures over a work week last September in Fort Lee.
State Assembly investigators and e-mails suggest the lanes were shut down deliberately, creating a traffic mess for days to punish that town's mayor for not endorsing the governor for reelection.
Wildstein, who is said to have carried out the lane closures as a top official of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, alleges in the letter that "evidence exists" that would tie "Mr. Christie to having knowledge" of the shutdown "during the period when the lanes were closed."
Although Christie aides have not pinpointed exactly when he knew of the closures, he has said -- and they agree -- that it was not until media reports began to appear some time after they were reopened. Christie also has said he knew nothing of any scheme to exact political revenge.
Christie is now going on the offensive, which includes efforts to discredit his accusers and critics.
Here's what you need to know:
Christie to speak
Christie plans to take questions about the lane closure Monday at 7 p.m. ET on a local New Jersey radio show called "Ask the Governor."
Chris Christie to take questions
It will be the first time Christie will address the unfolding controversy in any detail verbally since his nearly two-hour news conference on January 9 -- the one referenced in Wildstein's letter. That's when he last talked about the lane closures and his knowledge of them. He also denied having any connection to a political scandal.
Chris Christie scandal: A primer
First on CNN: Mayor behind Christie allegations full of contradictions
His office on the offensive
But he launched a strike over the weekend ahead of the radio appearance, lashing out at Wildstein, his old high school classmate who along with others key appointees and advisers have been subpoenaed by state legislative investigators to turn over documents and other materials related to the scandal by Monday.
"Bottom line - David Wildstein will do and say anything to save David Wildstein," a letter released by the governor's office said.
In new push back on Monday ahead of the radio show, Christie's office planned to send to friends and allies a list of tweets and stories aiming to put the focus on the New York Times' handling of Wildstein's letter on Friday, according to CNN's Jake Tapper.
The paper broke the story, saying Wildstein "had the evidence to prove" Christie knew about the lane closures. The newspaper quickly revised its lead to simply reflect what the letter written by Wildstein's attorney actually said: that "evidence exists," not that Wildstein was in possession of it.
Christie's office accused the paper of "sloppy reporting." The paper's public editor said the change was more than a nuance and could have taken the form of a "straightforward correction."
Christie blasts Wildstein
Read Wildstein's letter
The Wildstein letter could be important for a few reasons. One, he was a top Port Authority official appointed by Christie alleged to be at the center of the scandal; two, he has refused to testify before legislative investigators although he is subject to a subpoena to turn over documents; and three, the U.S. attorney in New Jersey has taken an interest in the case.
The letter did not actually divulge any evidence, nor did it suggest that Christie had knowledge of what his people might have been up to -- political or otherwise.
Super boos
Then there was a super Sunday for New Jersey that was not so super for the political host of the big game at MetLife Stadium.
Christie's presence at a ceremony where he passed the symbolic football to Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer -- next year's Super Bowl host - was met with boos.
That's something Christie rarely has heard as the state's popular governor and potential Republican presidential candidate.
The New York Daily News reported that one heckler said, "You made it across the bridge?"
Opinion: Are clouds gathering for Christie?
Christie speaks for only 30 seconds.
Not enough facts
It's not all bad for Christie.
The man in charge of the state legislative investigation is not calling for him to step down although the state's largest newspaper suggested that should occur if Wildstein's allegations are proven true.
New Jersey Assemblyman John Wisniewski said calls for Christie's resignation are "premature."
"We don't have enough facts to even get to that conversation," he said Sunday on CBS News' "Face the Nation."
Resignation talks premature
And his predecessor at the top of the Republican Governors Association, a plum political post some have used as a stepping stone to White House campaigns, said Christie should still lead the group this year.
"Yes, I don't think he should step down," Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal told CNN's "State of the Union" host Candy Crowley Sunday. "I think he should stay there."
Invite still good
Christie, who has rarely received praise from the conservative base, will let him speak at next month's Conservative Political Action Conference.
He was not invited to the meeting last year, sparking a war of words between the governor and the American Conservative Union, which organizes the conference. The group criticized Christie for not being conservative enough to address the gathering.
But the frosty relations began to thaw late last year after a mutual friend acted as an intermediary between the two after the governor's landslide re-election.
Christie to appear at CPAC
Poll numbers down
Following his landslide re-election victory in November, Christie was riding high in the polls. He topped the other potential GOP 2016 White House hopefuls in surveys of Republicans' choice for their next presidential nominee, and he was knotted up with Hillary Clinton in hypothetical general election showdowns.
Now, Christie's numbers have faded, according to a new CNN/ORC International survey. In a possible 2016 matchup with Clinton, the poll indicates Christie trails her by 16 percentage points, with Clinton at 55% and the Governor at 39% among registered voters nationwide. That's a dramatic switch from December, when Christie held a 48%-46% edge over Clinton.
More Christie aides leave
And there's more fallout. Christina Renna, Christie's director of departmental relations, has resigned. She reported to Bridget Kelly, Christie's former deputy chief of staff who Christie fired for her alleged role in the bridge scandal.
Who's who in the bridge scandal
Renna's attorney indicated in a letter that she had been planning on leaving her job since Christie was re-elected in November, according to New Jersey.com.
CNN's Jason Seher, Chris Frates and Mark Preston contributed to this report.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
