<DOC>
<DOCNO>1662</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_allpolitics/~3/qpcAd8mpNmw/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>State of the Union: Obama prepared to do end run around Congress</TITLE>
<TIME>Tue, 28 Jan 2014 18:55:55 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
The year of action. That's what 2014 is all about for President Barack Obama, and it is the underlying theme of tonight's State of the Union address.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
Washington (CNN) -- The year of action. That's what 2014 is all about for President Barack Obama, and it is the underlying theme of Tuesday night's State of the Union address.
"Let's make this a year of action," Obama will say, according to excerpts released in advance by the White House. That's what most Americans want -- for all of us in this chamber to focus on their lives, their hopes, their aspirations."
It's an optimistic goal for an president with a 43% approval rating entering his sixth year in office and facing a determined opposition otherwise known as the House of Representatives.
Understanding the reality and the challenges before him, Obama vows to accomplish parts of his agenda without Congress.
"What I offer tonight is a set of concrete, practical proposals to speed up growth, strengthen the middle class, and build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class," he will say, according to the excerpts.
"Some require Congressional action, and I'm eager to work with all of you. But America does not stand still, and neither will I, so wherever and whenever I can take steps without legislation to expand opportunity for more American families, that's what I'm going to do," Obama will say.
Defiance
Speaking from the lectern inside the House chamber for his fifth State of the Union address in what his aides call an "optimistic" speech, Obama will outline his goals and priorities that include economic opportunity, energy and education.
He will also make an impassioned plea for comprehensive immigration reform and will not attack congressional Republicans for failing to act on it, according to a source familiar with the speech. However, he will make an argument for why it makes good economic sense.
Separately, the President is also expected to unveil a proposal for a new type of account that allows Americans to save for retirement. Details of the plan were not immediately available.
This year's State of the Union is a defining test for Obama
Obama is also expected to talk not only about what he wants to get done, but how he's going to do it.
He will tell Americans tuning in via television, smart phone and social media that he will use more traditional methods to accomplish his goals. According to White House talking points, Obama plans to use "a phone" and "a pen" to move his agenda forward.
Brazile: Obama's message: A dysfunctional Congress, but we'll get it done anyway
In other words, with up to 535 members of Congress sitting in the same room during his speech, the President plans to tell them that he's going to go around them. One way is by using his pen to sign executive orders -- unilateral presidential directives.
The Republican Party immediately balked. Speaking to reporters Tuesday morning, House Speaker John Boehner said Republicans are "just not going to sit here and let the president trample all over us."
Brazile: Obama's message: A dysfunctional Congress, but we'll get it done anyway
Insult
Based on the President's announcement and the Republican response, the next year could be no different than previous as the two parties could butt heads on many issues.
"If the President is serious about a year of action, it would be nice if he would just reach out and work with us," Boehner said.
In reality, however, Obama's announcement is no different than his immediate predecessors who used executive orders often.
President George W. Bush ordered 197 executive actions at this point in his presidency and President Bill Clinton implemented 238 in his first five years in office. Both exceed the number of Obama's executive orders, which is 167 so far.
8 memorable State of the Union moments
And he has the public on his side. In a recent Washington Post/ ABC News poll, 52% of respondents said the President should use executive orders, including 69% of Democrats who say so.
Action
He announced an executive order impacting the minimum wage, an issue that has not received a lot of traction yet in Congress as Republicans largely oppose any federal increase, saying it will place a burden on employers.
Why Obama is playing a weak hand tonight
Under his executive order, new federal contract workers are to be paid $10.10 per hour, an increase of nearly $3 for hires contracted for low-wage positions such as cooks, custodians and janitors.
Obama senior adviser Valerie Jarrett said on CNN's New Day that the President supports a bill pending in Congress that would increase the minimum wage for all workers to $10.10.
"At the same time he doesn't want to sit waiting when there are too many people who are contractors for the federal government who are raising their children in poverty," she said.
Before he even delivers his speech, Obama aso picked up the phone to advance his agenda. While Congress has yet to to extend jobless benefits for the long-term unemployed that has impacted more than a million people, Obama reached out to major corporations that they support "best practices" against discrimination against long-term unemployed job applicants.
Lockheed Martin, Xerox, Deloitte and Siemens AG announced that they would participate.
John Edwards says Dems should do more on poverty
Statements
State of the Union guests are the personification of political statements.
The President and First Lady Michelle Obama have invited guests to promote their policy priorities for the year or highlight their accomplishments
Sitting in the President's and first lady's box include Cristian Avila, a "Dreamer" and immigration reform proponent faster, highlighting the President's push for immigration reform; Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear, who successfully implemented the Affordable Care Act insurance exchange; and Amanda Shelley, a physician assistant in Arizona who was unable to get health care until Obamacare.
The Republicans play that game, too. Boehner has invited a group of business owners who have been negatively impacted by Obamacare.
Rank-and-file members are also making obvious statements through their guest invitations. Rep. Vance McAllister of Louisiana is bringing "Duck Dynasty" star Willie Robertson. New Jersey Rep. Bill Pascrell is bringing Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich, who was on the receiving end of the George Washington Bridge scandal.
Response
Keeping with tradition, the Republican Party is giving a response to the President's speech. The selection of Republican Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington is significant as a woman will be the face of the Republican Party, which has struggled among perception with women.
Delivering the official tea party response is Utah Sen. Mike Lee.
Frustrated progressives start to look beyond Obama
CNN's Becky Brittain, Brianna Keilar, Jim Acosta, Dana Bash, Deirdre Walsh, Jake Tapper and Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
