<DOC>
<DOCNO>1633</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_allpolitics/~3/hhRWSzBrRUs/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>Christie starts second term</TITLE>
<TIME>Tue, 21 Jan 2014 16:59:02 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
On the first day of his second term, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie faces brewing storms -- literally and figuratively.
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
(CNN) -- Chris Christie faced new storms, literally and figuratively, on the first day of his second term as New Jersey governor.
A scandal rocking his administration over suggestions of political dirty tricks and strong-armed politics has already cost four top advisers their jobs, spawned multiple investigations and threatens to cloud any presidential ambitions the Republican may have for 2016.
He took the oath of office and then launched into a speech that praised how his state came together in his first four years to meet the challenges of economic recession and Superstorm Sandy, as well as the landslide re-election victory voters gave him last November.
Christie did not mention the brewing scandals but did note another storm, the wintry one raging outside the War Memorial in Trenton that provided an apt metaphor for the start of his second term.
A Republican governor in a state dominated by Democrats, he contrasted himself with the partisanship in Washington by promoting a bipartisan vision for the Garden State.
'Our dreams are the same'
"This election has taught us that the ways we divide each other -- by race, by class, by ethnicity, by wealth, and yes by political party -- is neither permanent nor necessary," he said. "Our dreams are the same: a good job, a great education for our children, safe streets in our neighborhood and core values which give our lives real meaning."
The remarks countered an image some opponents offer about an administration they say takes hardball politics to new levels in a state known for being rough-and-tumble politically.
The state legislative and federal investigations are primarily looking at suggestions top aides and advisers to the governor orchestrated traffic jams around the George Washington Bridge in Fort Lee last year to punish that town's Democratic mayor for not endorsing Christie for re-election.
Christie has denied knowledge of the alleged bridge scheme.
Christie scandals: What you need to know
Hours before Christie's second inaugural, a top New Jersey Republican defended him.
"He's a former federal prosecutor, indicted over a hundred politicians. He's the last guy on earth who's going to do an illegal activity. It's repugnant to him," said Jon Bramnick, the Republican leader in the New Jersey State Assembly, on CNN's "New Day."
With the next race for the White House on the horizon, and Christie said to be considering a bid for the GOP nomination, he hopes his inaugural message resonates with a national audience.
However, new national polling indicates his crossover appeal among Independents and Democrats, a rare characteristic that elevates his national standing, has softened.
CNN exclusive: Port Authority job created for Christie ally, source says
Hoboken mayor provides more evidence
Aside from the bridge scandal, Christie's team faces questions about how the administration handled Superstorm Sandy relief money approved by the federal government.
Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer this week alleged that the Christie's administration conditioned -- or "held hostage" -- storm recovery funds for her town on her support for a redevelopment project proposed by a firm, The Rockefeller Group, with ties to the governor.
Zimmer said Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno delivered the message in a parking lot last May, saying it came directly from Christie.
Guadango denies the allegation; Zimmer is standing firm, saying she's already told her story to federal prosecutors. State legislative investigators also want to hear from Zimmer.
Also on Sandy, a federal watchdog is looking into how the state used relief money in promoting the state's recovery from the October 2012 storm that devastated coastal areas in the state.
The Housing and Urban Development inspector general's office is specifically looking at spending on an ad produced for Jersey Shore marketing purposes that featured Christie and his family.
Christie's office has said the Obama administration signed off on its marketing plan, and vehemently denies any wrongdoing in the Zimmer matter.
Who is Dawn Zimmer?
Hot piece of land in Hoboken at center of Christie-Zimmer dispute
See her journal entries
Christie marches on as controversy at home unfolds
CNN's Chris Frates, Steve Kastenbaum, Erin McPike, Jake Tapper, Paul Steinhauser and Dana Davidsen contributed to this report.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
