<DOC>
<DOCNO>1812</DOCNO>
<URL>http://rss.cnn.com/~r/rss/cnn_allpolitics/~3/haZZUyMUl6U/index.html</URL>
<TITLE>In the Senate, politics is the family business</TITLE>
<TIME>Mon, 03 Mar 2014 11:17:07 EST</TIME>
<ABSTRACT>
Of the 100 members of the U.S. Senate, a third of them have family ties to other members of government, including Sen. Bernie Sanders' trans-Atlantic connection:
</ABSTRACT>
<TEXT>
Washington (CNN) -- Of the 100 members of the U.S. Senate, a third of them have family ties to other members of government, including Sen. Bernie Sanders' trans-Atlantic connection:
Mark Begich, D-Alaska: Father is former U.S. Rep. Nick Begich.
Michael Bennet, D-Colorado: Father is Douglas J. Bennet, former State Department official.
Roy Blunt, R-Missouri: Son is Matt Blunt, former Missouri governor.
John Boozman, R-Arkansas: Brother is Fay Boozman, former Arkansas state senator.
Maria Cantwell, D-Washington: Father is Paul F. Cantwell, former member of Indiana state legislature and former chief of staff to U.S. Rep. Andrew Jacobs Jr.
Ben Cardin, D-Maryland: Father is Meyer Cardin, former member of Maryland House of Delegates
Robert P. Casey Jr., D-Pennsylvania: Father is Robert P. Casey, former Pennsylvania governor.
Susan Collins, R-Maine: Mother is Patricia R. Collins, former mayor of Caribou, Maine; father is Donald F. Collins, former mayor of Caribou, Maine and former member of both houses of the Maine legislature
Mike Crapo, R-Idaho: Brother is Terry Crapo, former majority leader in Idaho House of Representatives
Jeff Flake, R-Arizona: Uncle is Jake Flake, former Arizona state senator.
Kirsten Gillibrand, D-New York: Father is Douglas Paul Rutnik, Republican Party lobbyist.
Kay Hagan, D-North Carolina: Uncle is Lawton Chiles, former U.S. senator and former Florida governor.
Tom Harkin, D-Iowa: Wife is Ruth Harkin, former deputy counsel for U.S. Department of Agriculture and named CEO of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) by former President Bill Clinton.
Dean Heller, R-Nevada: Son-in-law is Ed Ableser, an Arizona state senator.
Mike Johanns, R-Nebraska: Wife is Stephanie Armitage, Nebraska state senator.
Tim Johnson, D-South Dakota: Son is Brendan Johnson, U.S. attorney for the District of South Dakota.
Tim Kaine: D-Virginia: Wife is Anne Holton, Virginia education secretary; father-in-law is A. Linwood Holton Jr., former Virginia governor.
Mary Landrieu, D-Louisiana: Father is Moon Landrieu, former New Orleans mayor; brother is Mitch Landrieu, current New Orleans mayor and former lieutenant governor of Louisiana.
Mike Lee, R-Utah: Father is Rex E. Lee, former U.S. solicitor general; second cousin to Sens. Mark Udall and Tom Udall and former Sen. Gordon H. Smith.
Carl Levin, R-Michigan: Brother is Sander M. Levin, U.S. House of Representatives.
Joe Manchin, D-West Virginia: Father and grandfather were mayors of Farmington, West Virginia; uncle is A. James Manchin, former member of West Virginia House of Delegates, former West Virginia secretary of state and former West Virginia state treasurer.
Claire McCaskill, D-Missouri: Mother is Betty Anne McCaskill, first woman elected to city council of Columbia, Missouri.
Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky: Wife is Elaine Chao, former secretary of labor.
Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska: Father is Frank Murkowski, former Alaska governor and former U.S. senator.
Rand Paul, R-Kentucky: Father is Ron Paul, former U.S. House Representative and former presidential candidate.
Mark Pryor, D-Arkansas: Father is David Hampton Pryor, former U.S. senator and former Arkansas governor.
Harry Reid, D-Nevada: Son is Rory Reid, county commissioner and chairman, former candidate for Nevada governor.
Pat Roberts, R-Kansas: Father is C. Wesley Roberts, former chairman of the Republican National Committee.
John D. Rockefeller IV, D-West Virginia: Father-in-law is former Sen. Charles H. Percy.
Bernie Sanders, I-Vermont: Brother is Larry Sanders, Green Party council member on Oxfordshire County Council in England.
Mark Udall, D-Colorado: Father is Mo Udall, former representative and former presidential candidate; cousin is Sen. Tom Udall; second cousin is Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah.
Tom Udall, D-New Mexico: Father is Stewart Udall, former secretary of the interior; cousin is Sen. Mark Udall, second cousin is Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah.
Sheldon Whitehouse, D-Rhode Island: Father is Charles Sheldon Whitehouse, former diplomat; grandfather is Sheldon Whitehouse, former diplomat.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
